Step 1: Creating the GitHub Repository

I created a new GitHub repository named Task2-PowerBI, following the same procedure as in Week 2:

1. Clicked on the + New repository button.

2. Named the repository Task2-PowerBI.

3. Added a short description: "Enhanced Power BI Dashboard with advanced data analysis".

4. Set the repository visibility as Public.

5. Clicked Create repository.

Step 2: Importing the Dataset into Power BI

To build a meaningful dashboard, I first imported and cleaned the dataset in Power BI using the following steps:

2.1 Open Power BI and Load the Data

1. Launch Power BI Desktop.


2. Click on Home > Get Data > Excel/CSV (depending on the file format).


3. Select the dataset file from your local system and click Open.


4. Choose the necessary tables or sheets from the dataset preview and click Load.



2.2 Data Cleaning and Transformation

After loading the dataset, I used Power Query Editor to clean the data:

1. Remove Unnecessary Columns:

Click on Transform Data > Select columns that are not required > Click Remove Columns.



2. Handle Missing Data:

Use Replace Values to fill missing numerical values with 0 or N/A.

Use Remove Rows if the missing data is significant.



3. Change Data Types:

Ensure numerical values are formatted correctly (e.g., currency, percentage).

Click on each column > Select appropriate data type from the dropdown.



4. Rename Columns for better readability:

Example: Change Prod_ID to Product ID.



5. Create New Columns if Needed:

Use Add Column > Custom Column to derive new values from existing data.



6. Apply & Close the transformations to save the changes and load the cleaned dataset into Power BI.

Step 3: Creating Visualizations

To analyze data effectively, I created different types of visuals in Power BI.

3.1 Adding a Table Visualization

1. Click on Report View in Power BI.


2. Select Table Visualization from the Visualizations Pane.


3. Drag and drop the following fields into the table:

Product Type

SKU

Availability

Stock Levels

Revenue Generated



4. Adjust column width and formatting for clarity.


3.2 Creating a Bar Chart for Sales Analysis

1. Click on Bar Chart from the Visualizations Pane.


2. Drag Product Type into the X-axis.


3. Drag Number of Products Sold into the Y-axis.


4. Customize colors and labels using Format Pane for better readability.


3.3 Creating a Line Chart for Monthly Sales Trends

1. Click on Line Chart from the Visualizations Pane.


2. Drag Month into the X-axis.


3. Drag Total Sales into the Y-axis.


4. Add Data Labels for better visibility

3.4 Creating a Pie Chart for Category Sales Distribution

1. Click on Pie Chart from the Visualizations Pane.


2. Drag Product Category into Legend.


3. Drag Revenue Generated into Values.


4. Adjust the legend position and color scheme.

3.5 Creating Key Metrics Using DAX

I added DAX measures to summarize important business insights:

Total Revenue Calculation

TotalRevenue = SUM(Inventory[Revenue Generated])

Stock Availability Percentage

StockAvailability = 
    DIVIDE(SUM(Inventory[Stock Levels]), SUM(Inventory[Order Quantities]), 0)


These measures were displayed in Card Visuals to highlight key performance indicators (KPIs).


3.6 Finalizing the Dashboard

1. Arrange the visuals in a structured layout.


2. Add Titles and Descriptions for clarity.


3. Apply Filters (e.g., product categories, regions) to enable dynamic analysis.


4. Save the Power BI file before moving to GitHub for submission.
